---
title: "The Cambridge Approach to Generative AI and Assessment"
source_url: "https://www.cambridge.org/news-and-insights/The-Cambridge-approach-to-generative-AI-and-assessment"
source_title: "Cambridge University Press & Assessment"
author: ""
date: "2025"
type: institutional-policy
tags: [ai-policy, peer-institutions, academic-integrity, oral-exam-design, written-vs-oral]
summary: "Cambridge's nuanced position: 'AI reinforces the value of in-person exams' but recognizes in-person supervision (not necessarily oral format) is key, framing AI as a challenge requiring diverse assessment methods rather than mandating oral exams specifically."
harvard_relevance: "Cambridge suggests options beyond oral exams for AI-resistant assessment: in-class exams, proctored digital exams, process-based portfolios, with oral exams as one option among several."
---
quality: Official university policy documents. Authoritative for institutional practice.
https://www.cambridge.org/news-and-insights/The-Cambridge-approach-to-generative-AI-and-assessment

Elle's notes:
2. Cambridge University Press & Assessment: "AI Reinforces Value of In-Person Exams"
:page_facing_up: The Cambridge approach to generative AI and assessment
Cambridge University Press & Assessment, 2025
Summary: Cambridge's official stance: "In many cases, the rise of AI reinforces the value of in-person exams, as well as digital exams with human supervision, which are fair, rigorous and help guard against plagiarism and cheating." The institution emphasizes that "students must not pass off AI generated work as their own" (treating AI like other plagiarism), but "thoughtful use of technology improves how we develop and deliver assessment." Cambridge frames AI as challenge requiring diverse assessment methods, not mandating oral exams specifically.
Harvard Context: Cambridge's nuanced position contrasts with binary "oral vs. written" framing. They recognize that in-person supervision (not necessarily oral format) is key to AI-resistant assessment. For Harvard, this suggests options beyond oral exams: (1) In-class essay exams (handwritten or typed under supervision); (2) Proctored digital exams with lockdown browsers; (3) Process-based portfolios (submit drafts, outlines, revisions over time); (4) Oral exams as one option, not the only one. Cambridge also acknowledges "thoughtful use of technology" — they're not rejecting AI entirely but asking how to integrate it ethically. Harvard could develop AI literacy curriculum teaching students when/how to use generative AI responsibly, rather than purely prohibiting or avoiding it through oral-only assessment.
ox.ac.ukResearch examinations | University of OxfordNew regulations relating to postgraduate research (PGR) examination outcomes came into effect from Michaelmas term 2025. Students whom submitted their research thesis for the first time on or afterhttps://www.ox.ac.uk/students/academic/exams/researchmpls.ox.ac.ukExamination and GraduationThis section contains important guidance about the research degree examination process, and how to book your graduation ceremony.Cambridge University Press & AssessmentThe Cambridge approach to generative AI and assessmentCambridge University Press & Assessment is working to make the most of opportunities around AI. We are approaching this new technology in a spirit of critical engagement. As we do so in assessment, we uphold the principles set out below.https://www.cambridge.org/news-and-insights/The-Cambridge-approach-to-generative-AI-and-assessment[9:01 AM]Source quality: Official Cambridge Press & Assessment publication. Institutional policy statement.

--

The Cambridge approach to generative AI and assessment 
 

News and Events
 
 
 
 

 Open share menu
 
 
 Share
 
 
 

 Close share menu
 
 
 - 
 
 

 Facebook
 

 - 
 

 X
 

 - 
 
 

 LinkedIn
 

 - 
 

 
 Copy link
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 The Cambridge approach to generative AI and assessment 
 
 Cambridge University Press & Assessment is working to make the most of opportunities around AI. We are approaching this new technology in a spirit of critical engagement. As we do so in assessment, we uphold the principles set out below.

 
 27 Mar 2023

 Assessment Future of education