---
title: "Radcliffe Fellowship and GSD: Oral Presentation as Institutional Practice"
source_url: "https://www.radcliffe.harvard.edu/radcliffe-fellowship/become-a-radcliffe-fellow"
source_title: "Radcliffe Institute for Advanced Study"
author: ""
date: ""
type: institutional-policy
tags: [harvard, pedagogy, discussion, performance, professional-domains]
summary: "Radcliffe fellows present work to interdisciplinary audiences requiring translation of specialized knowledge for non-experts; GSD uses daily desk critiques as formative oral assessment, making oral feedback frequent rather than rare and summative."
harvard_relevance: "The Radcliffe model suggests cross-concentration oral events where seniors present to panels from other fields, and GSD's desk crit model shows frequent formative oral feedback is more effective than rare summative oral exams."
---
quality: Official GSD program descriptions and policies. Authoritative for institutional practice.
https://www.radcliffe.harvard.edu/radcliffe-fellowship/become-a-radcliffe-fellow

Elle's notes:
2. Radcliffe Institute Fellowship Program: Weekly Fellows' Presentations
:page_facing_up: Become a Radcliffe Fellow / Graduate Student Fellowships
Radcliffe Institute for Advanced Study, current
Summary: Radcliffe fellows (artists, scholars, public intellectuals) are "expected to reside in Cambridge during their fellowship year and participate... by attending all weekly fellows' talks and lunches." Fellows "will also present their own work to the fellows" — oral presentations that engage interdisciplinary audiences. The program emphasizes that "This fellowship was the most inspiring and generative year of my scholarly life" specifically because of cross-disciplinary intellectual exchange through oral presentation and dialogue.
Harvard Graduate School of DesignAcademic Experience"The cores of the GSD’s various disciplines galvanize the dialogue that drives necessary change across the School and across the world to meet the demandsEst. reading time4 minuteshttps://www.gsd.harvard.edu/admissions/life-at-the-gsd/academic-experience/Harvard Graduate School of DesignCollaborative Design Engineering Studio I (with SEAS)The first-year “Collaborative Design Engineering” studio runs for two semesters, and this year will address the theme of “waste.”Est. reading time2 minuteshttps://www.gsd.harvard.edu/course/collaborative-design-engineering-studio-i-with-seas-fall-2019/Radcliffe Institute for Advanced Study at Harvard UniversityBecome a Radcliffe Fellow | Radcliffe Institute for Advanced Study at Harvard UniversityA fellowship year at Harvard Radcliffe Institute is an opportunity to step away from usual routines and dive deeply into a project.https://www.radcliffe.harvard.edu/radcliffe-fellowship/become-a-radcliffe-fellowRadcliffe Institute for Advanced Study at Harvard UniversityGraduate Student Fellowships | Radcliffe Institute for Advanced Study at Harvard UniversityThe 2026–2027 application on CARAT is now open.The deadline for applications is 11:59 PM, Friday, February 13, 2026.https://www.radcliffe.harvard.edu/opportunities-for-students/graduate-student-fellowships[9:16 AM]Harvard Context: The Radcliffe model demonstrates oral presentation's value for interdisciplinary scholarship. When a historian presents to an audience including scientists, artists, and social scientists, they must: (1) Translate specialized knowledge for non-experts; (2) Explain why work matters beyond narrow subfield; (3) Respond to questions from unfamiliar perspectives — exactly the skills Arendt and Cicero emphasized for public intellectual life. For Harvard undergraduates, the Radcliffe model suggests cross-concentration oral events: seniors present thesis research to panels including faculty from other fields, or symposia where Government, History, and Economics concentrators discuss shared themes (democracy, inequality, globalization). The benefit: students learn that knowledge isn't siloed — the best scholarship speaks across boundaries. The challenge: requires coordination across departments and willingness to make oral presentation public (Radcliffe talks are open events, not private examinations).
Source quality: Radcliffe program descriptions. Authoritative for fellowship requirements.

--

Become a Radcliffe Fellow

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Play video
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 Toggle information
 
 
 
 
 
 Close detail panel
 
 
 Still image from video, "Breaking Silos and Making Transformative Discoveries at the Radcliffe Fellowship Program"
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 A fellowship year at Harvard Radcliffe Institute is an opportunity to step away from usual routines and dive deeply into a project.

 
 
 
 Share
 Share this page on Facebook
 Share this page on Bluesky
 Share this page on LinkedIn
 Copy Link
 

 
 Related
 
 Radcliffe
Fellowship
 
 

 
 Radcliffe fellows are exceptional scientists, writers, scholars, public intellectuals, and artists whose work is making a difference in their professional fields and in the larger world. Fellows join a uniquely interdisciplinary and creative community. Radcliffe supports engaged scholarship, where fellows develop new tools and methods, challenge artistic and scholarly conventions, and illuminate our past and our present. We welcome applications from scholars and artists proposing innovative work that confronts pressing social and policy issues and seeking to engage audiences beyond academia.

 

 “A year at Radcliffe was everything I could ask for. The gifts of time and space elevated the way I thought about my work. After many, many years, I felt truly free to explore my craft.”

—2022–2023 Radcliffe fellow

 

Application Details
The deadline for applying has passed. Applicants will be notified of the results in March 2026. If you receive an offer of another fellowship before hearing from us, please let us know by submitting a Request for Information form and selecting the “Selection Process” category.

Please check back in spring 2026 for 2027–2028 fellowship application information. If you would like to receive a one-time notification when the application for the 2027–2028 fellowship year goes live, please leave us your email here.

About the Fellowship Program
The Radcliffe Fellowship Program supports 50 scholars, artists, and public intellectuals who have demonstrated records of achievement in their respective fields and show great promise for future contributions.

Throughout the year, fellows convene regularly to share their work in progress, supporting one another in various intellectual groups and building connections through social events. They benefit from access to Harvard’s libraries and archives, to professional development opportunities, and to Harvard college students through participating in the Radcliffe Research Partnership Program. In this program, students intellectually engage with fellows and their projects by researching sources, reviewing book chapters, discussing new approaches to projects, and more.

Watch previous public fellows’ presentation series.

 

 “This fellowship was the most inspiring and generative year of my scholarly life to date. The opportunity to meet and talk with people from such different areas of expertise expanded my horizons beyond measure.”

—2018–2019 Radcliffe fellow

 

Fellowship Program Details
Radcliffe supports engaged scholarship. We welcome applications from scholars and artists proposing innovative work that confronts pressing social and policy issues and seeking to engage audiences beyond academia.

Reflecting Radcliffe’s unique history and institutional legacy, we welcome proposals that focus on women, gender, and society or draw on the Schlesinger Library’s rich collections.

We welcome proposals relevant to the Institute’s multi-year focus areas, which include the following:

- Academic freedom and connecting across difference, especially proposals addressing intellectual virtues, free and open inquiry, and diversity of thought, political polarization, peace and conflict, inequality, religious pluralism—including religion and public and family life—and other policy issues as they relate to institutions of higher education; within this focus area, we also welcome proposals that constructively challenge disciplinary orthodoxies or advance new and potentially transformative perspectives or approaches.
- Climate change, especially proposals addressing critical questions of impact and equity.
In addition, we welcome proposals in the areas of science, technology, engineering, and mathematics directly impacted by federal research funding cuts.

Fellowship Program Details 

Eligibility Guidelines and Application Materials

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 Play video
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 The information included in the video is accurate as of the date it was published.

 

 
 

 
 
 Share:
 Share this page on Facebook
 Share this page on Bluesky
 Share this page on LinkedIn
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Back to top
 
 B
 a
 c
 k
  
 t
 o
  
 t
 o
 p