---
title: "Harvard Curriculum 1640-1800: Archives and Research Sources"
source_url: "https://guides.library.harvard.edu/c.php?g=405381&p=6465805"
source_title: "Harvard Library Research Guides"
author: "Harvard University Archives"
date: ""
type: historical-source
tags: [history, harvard, oral-exam-design, written-vs-oral]
summary: "Harvard Archives document that oral performance -- prayers, recitations, disputations -- structured the daily rhythm of undergraduate life far more than written work from 1640-1800, with thesis disputation topics shaping assessment across presidencies."
harvard_relevance: "A goldmine for faculty interested in historical precedent; a working group could map the evolution of assessment formats at Harvard from 1636-present."
---
Harvard in the 17th and 18th Centuries
https://guides.library.harvard.edu/c.php?g=405381&p=6465805

Elle's notes:
The Harvard University Archives contain extensive documentation of early curricula, including details on "thesis disputation topics" that shaped student assessment from 1640-1800. These records show how each Harvard president influenced the "academic landscape" through oral examination topics and formats. Samuel Eliot Morison's Harvard College in the Seventeenth Century (1936) includes detailed chapters on curriculum and student life, documenting that oral performance — prayers, recitations, disputations — structured the daily rhythm of undergraduate life far more than written work.
guides.library.harvard.eduResearch Guides: Harvard in the 17th and 18th Centuries: Harvard College Curriculum, 1640-1800: Overview and Research SourcesResearch Guides: Harvard in the 17th and 18th Centuries: Harvard College Curriculum, 1640-1800: Overview and Research Sources[6:47 AM]Harvard relevance: The archives are a goldmine for faculty interested in historical precedent. A working group could commission an undergraduate or graduate research project to map the evolution of assessment formats at Harvard from 1636-present, identifying when and why the shift from oral to written occurred, and whether the reasons that drove that shift (standardization, efficiency, objectivity) still hold in the AI era. Making this history visible — perhaps in a symposium or white paper — would ground the conversation in Harvard's own institutional DNA rather than treating oral assessment as imported from elsewhere.

--

Harvard College Curriculum, 1640-1880: Overview

One of the earliest known descriptions of the life and mission of Harvard College, a promotional pamphlet printed in England in 1643 and entitled “New Englands (sic) First Fruits,” justifies the establishment of the College “to advance Learning and perpetuate it to Posterity; dreading to leave an illiterate Ministery to the Churches, when our present Ministers shall lie in the Dust.”  Outlining the college curriculum, complete with the time and order of studies, the missive provides invaluable detail regarding academic life and studies at seventeenth century Harvard.

Much of what is known about the early Harvard College curriculum comes from “New Englands First Fruits” and from student and faculty notebooks and personal diaries, college textbooks and other books known to have been part of the College Library collection and/or owned by students, Commencement theses and quaestiones, examination papers, and the printed College Laws.

During its early years, the College offered a classic academic course based on the English university model, but consistent with the Puritan philosophy of the first colonists.  The mission of the College, according to the 1650 Charter, was:  “the advancement of all good literature, artes, and Sciences.”  Latin was the language of instruction (although the Latin speaking requirement was not renewed in the College Laws of 1692).  Students were expected to arrive at Harvard well-versed in Latin grammar and, once enrolled, followed a prescribed course of studies in Latin, Greek and Hebrew; the examination of classical languages through histories and drama providing the base for scholarly pursuits.  Other disciplines included Rhetoric and Logic, Ethics and Politics, Arithmetic and Geometry, and later, Algebra, Astronomy, Physics, Metaphysics and Theology (although Harvard College never functioned strictly as a divinity school).

Early records of the Harvard College faculty, especially the Faculty Minutes, as well as the records of the College Steward and Butler, and the Disorders Papers, are important sources for information relating to specific students, as individual student files, including admission records, grade reports and transcripts, were not established at Harvard until the nineteenth century.  The system of ordering or ranking student names in the College catalogues by “seniority,” from 1642-1772, has been a source of speculation.   It is not known whether the rankings were accorded for social rank, merit, or other criteria.  The practice was discontinued in 1773 in favor of an alphabetical arrangement. 

The collected papers of Harvard’s seventeenth and eighteenth century presidents, as well as tutors and professors, provide further insight, as academic reforms instituted by successive Harvard administrations contributed steadily to the development of the University.  Each of the seventeenth and eighteenth century Harvard College presidents, from Henry Dunster (1640-1654) to Joseph Willard (1781-1804), influenced the academic landscape according to his interests.  Reflected in numerous ways, including thesis disputation topics, teaching staff appointments and lectures, presidential leadership affected the expanding colonial Harvard curriculum.

The formal naming of Harvard as a university in 1780, the founding of Harvard Medical School in 1782 and the establishment, early in the nineteenth century, of Harvard Law School (1817) and Harvard Divinity School (1819) broadened the overall curriculum, advanced Harvard from a provincial seat of learning and secured its reputation as a national university.
