---
title: "Harvard Kennedy School Master in Public Policy Curriculum"
source_url: "https://www.hks.harvard.edu/educational-programs/masters-programs/master-public-policy"
source_title: "Harvard Kennedy School"
author: "Harvard Kennedy School"
date: ""
type: institutional-policy
tags: [harvard, professional-domains, oral-exam-design, capstone, performance, curriculum-design]
summary: "HKS requires MPP students to defend their Policy Analysis Exercise orally before the community, reflecting that policy work demands oral advocacy, presentation, and persuasion alongside written analysis."
harvard_relevance: "If HBS, HMS, and HKS all require oral performance because their fields demand it, undergraduate programs preparing students for these careers should integrate oral assessment earlier."
---
Master in Public Policy: Curriculum
https://www.hks.harvard.edu/educational-programs/masters-programs/master-public-policy

Elle's notes:
Kennedy School's Master in Public Policy (MPP) program centers on "capstone exercises, case studies, experiential learning" with emphasis on "practice." The Policy Analysis Exercise (PAE)—required for all MPP students—culminates in oral presentations each spring where "select second-year MPP students share their Policy Analysis Exercise projects with the HKS community." The program description emphasizes "sharpen hard and soft skills" and "gain the confidence to move policy forward"—language acknowledging that policy work requires oral advocacy, presentation, and persuasion. HKS recognizes written policy memos are necessary but insufficient; students must defend recommendations verbally before stakeholders.

Harvard relevance: Kennedy School trains future policymakers, and oral communication is non-optional in that profession (congressional testimony, stakeholder meetings, media interviews, crisis briefings). The MPP curriculum reflects this: written analysis + oral presentation as integrated assessment. This parallels Theme 7's professional domains evidence (law, medicine, business all require oral competency). For Harvard College: if professional graduate programs (HBS, HMS, HKS) all require oral performance because their fields demand it, shouldn't undergraduate programs preparing students for these careers integrate oral assessment earlier? The current model—four years of written-only undergraduate assessment, then sudden oral requirements in professional school—creates unnecessary discontinuity.

--

Key Program Information
Program Length: Two years (varies for students pursuing joint or concurrent degrees)

Degree Awarded: Master in Public Policy

Admission Application Deadline: December 2026

Financial Aid Application Deadline: January 2027

 
 
 
 
 Request Information
 

 

 
 
 
 

Contact Admissions & Financial Aid
 Email
617-495-1155

 

 
 
 
 
 
 Become an expert problem solver

The Master in Public Policy Program provides you with a conceptual toolkit rooted in the social sciences and adapted for action.

A defining feature of the Master in Public Policy (MPP) Program is its commitment to practice. Take what you learn here and apply it right away—through capstone exercises, case studies, experiential learning opportunities, and optional internships—to deliver lasting results.

At the heart of the program is a cross-disciplinary core curriculum that exposes you to the analytic methods, conceptual frameworks, and habits of mind that empower you to craft solutions for real-world public problems.

“I saw that the academic offerings at HKS would allow me to sharpen hard and soft skills, deepen my understanding of public policy’s many complex intersections, and gain the confidence to move policy forward.”

—Bibi Lichauco MPP 2025

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

About the MPP Program

 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 Curriculum Overview
 
 

 
 
 The MPP curriculum will broaden your perspective and sharpen skills to prepare you for a successful career in public service.

The first year of the MPP Program focuses on the cross-disciplinary fundamentals of policy design, analysis, and implementation. You will take core courses to develop professional competencies in: 

- Economics
- Ethics
- Financial management
- Negotiation
- Policy design and delivery
- Politics
- Quantitative analysis
- Applied history

Areas of Focus
As a complement to the MPP core curriculum, you will also choose a Policy Area of Concentration (PAC) in one of five areas: 

- Business and Government Policy
- Democracy, Politics, and Institutions
- International and Global Affairs
- Political and Economic Development
- Social and Urban Policy 

Summer Internships
While it isn’t a formal requirement, most MPP students take on a policy-oriented internship during the summer after the first year. You’ll apply what you’ve learned in class to gain deeper insights; use new skills; and face challenges in different professional areas, policy fields, or parts of the world.

 
 

 
 

 
 
 Core Curriculum
 
 

 
 
 Most first-year MPP students take 38 credits, which consists of 18 core course credits in the fall and 16 core course credits credits in the spring. Many students also begin taking elective courses in the spring of their first year.

Required Core Courses (First Year)
- Resources, Incentives, and Choices I: Markets and Market Failures (API-101, 4 credits)
- Quantitative Analysis and Empirical Methods (API-201, 4 credits)
- Policy Design and Delivery (API-501, 4 credits)
- Race and Racism in Public Policies, Practices, and Perspectives (DPI-386M, students complete two modules of 2 credits each that they can select from a list of four options, at any point in their first year. Course options will be published when the AY2025-26 course catalogue goes live)*
- Fundamentals of Negotiation Analysis and Practice (MLD-220M, 2 credits)
- Resources, Incentives, and Choices II: Analysis of Public Policy (API-102, 4 credits)
- Empirical Methods II (API-202M, 2 credits & API-203M, 2 credits)
- Politics and Ethics in Unstable Times (DPI-200, 4 credits)
- Spring Exercise (API-500M, 0 credits)
*The above requirements will be in effect for the MPP class entering in the fall semester of 2025.

Spring Exercise
The first-year MPP curriculum culminates in the Spring Exercise, a two-week simulation that applies the tools and concepts of the first-year core to a real-world, real-time policy issue. 

During the Exercise, you are assigned to a five-person team tasked with forging solutions to a deliberately tough challenge. You’ll conduct research, attend sessions and presentations that link the topic to your core courses, and work with your team to prepare a package of policy and management recommendations. 

Required Core Courses (Second Year)
- Policy Area of Concentration year-long seminar (or “PAC Seminar”), including completion of the Policy Analysis Exercise (PAE) (4 credits)
- PAC electives (8-20 credits dependent on PAC/Concentration)

Policy Analysis Exercise
The Policy Analysis Exercise (PAE)  is the capstone of the MPP experience.

The PAC Seminars familiarize you with key issues and policy debates in your particular area and guide you through the PAE writing process. Once you declare your PAE topic, you will be assigned a faculty advisor with the expertise to help you succeed.  

During the PAE, you develop solutions for a policy or management problem that your client—a public or nonprofit organization—is grappling with. You and your client work together to scope the problem, examine the context,  gather data, formulate and evaluate options, and make actionable recommendations. The final analysis—usually around 40 pages or 10,000 words—gives you the opportunity to integrate the technical skills and specialized knowledge you have gained from the MPP curriculum while also helping your client organization create public value.

Learn more about the Policy Analysis Exercise and read past examples. 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 Degree Requirements
 
 

 
 
 The MPP Program consists of four semesters of full-time coursework in residence at HKS. 

To graduate, you must: 

- Earn at least 72 credits, which must include the required core curriculum, your PAC requirements, capstone experiences, and electives
- Matriculate as a full-time, in-residence student and take between 12-24 credits per semester
- Finish with a GPA of B or better
- Earn a B- or higher in all required MPP core courses, and PAC requirements, as well as a passing grade for the Spring Exercise, PAE, and PAC Seminar

 
 

 
 

 
 
 Joint and Concurrent Degrees
 
 

 
 
 You might consider pursuing a second degree jointly or concurrently if you’re interested in how the world’s challenges can be addressed at the intersection of public policy and business, law, medicine, design, or other fields.

Pursuing a joint or concurrent degree reduces coursework and residency requirements and makes it possible to earn two degrees in a shorter amount of time.

Joint Degrees
As an MPP student, you can pursue a joint degree—either an MBA at Harvard Business School or a JD at Harvard Law School—that involves carefully crafted and integrated coursework.

Concurrent Degrees
You can pursue a concurrent degree in business, law, medicine, design, or another field—as long as it is:

- A professional degree (an MBA, MD, or JD; not a PhD or an academic master’s)
- At least a two-year program
- Completed at a partner school
The concurrent degree program allows you to pursue degrees at HKS and at a partner school; however, the coursework is not as closely integrated as the joint degree program. As a concurrent degree student, you are responsible for weaving together the two halves of your learning experience.

 
 

 
 

 
 
 Faculty
 
 

 
 
 Faculty members at HKS aren’t just teachers. They are global experts who shape public policy, advise governments, and help run major institutions in the United States and abroad. Learn more about our core MPP faculty members.

 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 Christopher Norio Avery
 

 
 
 
 MPP Faculty Chair; Roy E. Larsen Professor of Public Policy

 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 Marcella Alsan
 

 
 
 
 Angelopoulos Professor of Public Policy

 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 Desmond Ang
 

 
 
 
 Assistant Professor of Public Policy

 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 Gloria Ayee
 

 
 
 
 Adjunct Lecturer in Public Policy

 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 Jeeyang Rhee Baum
 

 
 
 
 Adjunct Lecturer in Public Policy

 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 Jonathan Borck
 

 
 
 
 Adjunct Lecturer in Public Policy

 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 Cornell Brooks 
 

 
 
 
 Hauser Professor of the Practice of Nonprofit Organizations; Professor of the Practice of Public Leadership 

 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 Michela Carlana 
 

 
 
 
 Assistant Professor of Public Policy

 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 Dara Kay Cohen
 

 
 
 
 Professor of Public Policy

 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 Suzanne Cooper 
 

 
 
 
 Academic Dean for Teaching and Curriculum; Edith M. Stokey Senior Lecturer in Public Policy

 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 Justin de Benedictis-Kessner
 

 
 
 
 Assistant Professor of Public Policy

 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 Pınar Doğan
 

 
 
 
 Senior Lecturer in Public Policy

 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 John Donahue
 

 
 
 
 Raymond Vernon Senior Lecturer in Public Policy

 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 Mark Fagan
 

 
 
 
 Lecturer in Public Policy

 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 Anthony Foxx 
 

 
 
 
 Emma Bloomberg Professor of the Practice of Public Leadership

 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 Archon Fung 
 

 
 
 
 Winthrop Laflin McCormack Professor of Citizenship and Self-Government

 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 Jason Furman
 

 
 
 
 Aetna Professor of the Practice of Economic Policy

 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 Sharad Goel
 

 
 
 
 Professor of Public Policy

 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 Yanilda González
 

 
 
 
 Assistant Professor of Public Policy

 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 John Haigh
 

 
 
 
 Lecturer in Public Policy

 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 Juan Jimenez
 

 
 
 
 Lecturer in Public Policy

 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 Juliette Kayyem
 

 
 
 
 Belfer Senior Lecturer in International Security

 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 Robert Lawrence
 

 
 
 
 Albert L. Williams Professor of International Trade and Investment

 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 Tim Layton
 

 
 
 
 30th Anniversary Associate Professor of Health Care Policy, HMS

 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 Elizabeth Linos
 

 
 
 
 Emma Bloomberg Associate Professor of Public Policy and Management

 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 Brian Mandell
 

 
 
 
 Mohamed Kamal Senior Lecturer in Negotiation and Public Policy

 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 Zoe Marks
 

 
 
 
 Lecturer in Public Policy

 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 Liz McKenna
 

 
 
 
 Assistant Professor of Public Policy

 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 Julia Minson
 

 
 
 
 Associate Professor of Public Policy

 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 Khalil Gibran Muhammad
 

 
 
 
 Ford Foundation Professor of History, Race, and Public Policy

 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 Thomas Patterson
 

 
 
 
 Bradlee Professor of Government and the Press

 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 Christopher Robichaud
 

 
 
 
 Senior Lecturer in Ethics and Public Policy

 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 Eric Rosenbach
 

 
 
 
 Senior Lecturer in Public Policy

 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 Juan Saavedra
 

 
 
 
 Lecturer in Public Policy

 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 Benjamin Schneer
 

 
 
 
 Assistant Professor of Public Policy

 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 Daniel Schneider
 

 
 
 
 Malcolm Wiener Professor of Social Policy, HKS; Professor of Sociology, FAS

 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 Mark Shepard
 

 
 
 
 Associate Professor of Public Policy

 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 Kathryn Sikkink
 

 
 
 
 Ryan Family Professor of Human Rights Policy

 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 Sandra Susan Smith
 

 
 
 
 Daniel and Florence Guggenheim Professor of Criminal Justice, HKS; Professor of Sociology, FAS; Carol K. Pforzheimer Professor, Radcliffe

 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 Fatema Sumar
 

 
 
 
 Adjunct Lecturer in Public Policy

 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 Teddy Svoronos
 

 
 
 
 Lecturer in Public Policy

 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 Charles Taylor
 

 
 
 
 Assistant Professor of Public Policy

 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 Stephen Walt
 

 
 
 
 Robert and Renee Belfer Professor of International Affairs

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 
  

MPP at a Glance

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Entering class size
 

 
 
 
 
 
 Entering age
 

 
 
 
 
 
 Years of work experience
 

 

 
 
 
 *Statistics are based on a five-year average.

 

 
 
 
 

Employment Snapshot: MPP Class of 2024 Employment Sectors
Unspecified employment sector is 3 percent. 
 

 

 
 
 
 

Applying to the MPP Program

 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 Prerequisites
 
 

 
 
 To apply to the MPP Program, you must have:

- A bachelor’s degree with a strong academic record
- Evidence of quantitative proficiency such as success in undergraduate-level economics, statistics, or calculus courses, regardless of your undergraduate major
Work experience is not strictly required but is an advantage for admission, and more importantly, for making the most of the MPP experience. Incoming MPP students typically have 2-3 years of professional work experience.

 
 

 
 

 
 
 How to Apply
 
 

 
 
 A complete application to the MPP Program includes: 

- Online application
- Essays
- Résumé/CV
- Three letters of recommendation
- Standardized test scores- The GRE or GMAT is required; however, applicants who have successfully completed certain quantitative coursework have an opportunity to waive this requirement. See the How to Apply page for additional details.
- Non-native English speakers who did not earn an undergraduate degree conducted in English must submit TOEFL, IELTS, or Cambridge English exam results.

- Academic transcripts
- $100 application fee or waiver
Read more about how to apply.  

There is one admission application deadline and one start date for each degree program per year. You may apply to only one master's degree program per admissions cycle. 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 Tuition & Fees
 
 

 
 
 

2026-2027 Tuition and Fees
ExpenseCostTuition$64,340Course materials fee$618HKS student activity fee$250HUHS Student Health Fee (SHF)*$1,944Student Health Insurance Plan (SHIP)*$4,954Total tuition and fees$72,106The full cost of attendance for the 2026-2027 academic year, including indirect costs such as living expenses, is outlined in Funding Your Master’s Education to help you plan financially for our master’s degree programs. The 2027-2028 academic year rates will be published in March 2027. HKS tuition and fees are subject to change without notice. 

Financial Assistance
While our resources are limited, we are committed to distributing as much financial assistance as possible to our talented students. You are strongly encouraged to explore all funding opportunities.

 
 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 

 MPP students highlight their work at the Policy Analysis Exercise Showcase 
 

 
 
 Each spring, select second-year MPP students share their Policy Analysis Exercise projects with the HKS community.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
  

Learn More About the HKS Community

 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 Student Life