---
title: "Loora and SmallTalk2Me: AI Oral Practice Platforms"
source_url: "https://www.loora.com/"
source_title: "Loora"
author: ""
date: ""
type: practitioner-guide
tags: [ai-tools, practice-and-rehearsal, student-anxiety, equity, accessibility, scaffolding]
summary: "Commercial AI platforms now offer conversational oral practice with instant feedback in a 'judgement-free zone,' revealing an ecosystem that could either exacerbate inequities (paid access) or democratize oral exam preparation if institutions provide access."
harvard_relevance: "Harvard could provide institutional access to AI oral practice platforms (like the Writing Center for writing) to scaffold fluency and reduce the equity gap in oral assessment preparation."
---
Loora (AI English tutor platform)
https://www.loora.com/

Elle's notes:
Commercial platforms like Loora (AI English tutor) and SmallTalk2Me (oral exam practice) now offer conversational AI specifically designed for oral fluency development. Loora advertises: "The most advanced AI English speaking practice app... Engage in personalized conversations... receive instant feedback on pronunciation, grammar, accent." Users can practice "business meetings, job interviews, or friendly chats" with an AI conversation partner available 24/7. The platform uses "cutting-edge large language models, specifically trained and optimized" for language learning. SmallTalk2Me offers "free real-time speaking test, get CEFR score" with AI evaluation. Both platforms emphasize "judgement-free zone" and "pressure-free practice"—addressing the student anxiety problem documented in Theme 3.
National Deaf CenterAI as an Accommodation for Deaf College StudentsColleges are still struggling to set clear AI policies, even as students, faculty, and staff are already using these tools.. Nearly 80% of Gen Z students report using AI, and most believe that schools should not only permit its use in the classroom but also be required to teach students how to use it effectively.Est. reading time5 minuteshttps://nationaldeafcenter.org/news-items/ai-as-an-accommodation-for-deaf-college-students/Loora.comSpeak English with Loora AIUnlock your full potential with Loora, your very own AI English tutor. Engage in real conversations with Loora anytime, anywhere, and on any topic![11:34 AM]Harvard relevance: These commercial platforms reveal an emerging ecosystem for oral exam preparation that could exacerbate or mitigate inequities. On one hand: students who can afford subscriptions ($20-50/month) get unlimited oral practice with AI feedback before high-stakes exams. This advantages wealthier students—the "digital divide" problem (UK HEPI, Theme 4 Cycle 2). On the other hand: if Harvard provides access to such platforms (like it provides writing tutors via the Writing Center), oral exam preparation becomes democratized. The pedagogical opportunity: assign students to practice with Loora/SmallTalk2Me weekly, receive AI feedback on argument quality, then defend the same topics in live oral exams with faculty. This scaffolds fluency (Theme 3 recommendation) while familiarizing students with the format. The commercial market's existence also signals demand: people will pay for oral fluency development, suggesting skills tested by oral exams have real-world value.

--

Unlock your full potential with your very own AI English tutor
Speak fluent English with Loora, the most advanced AI English teacher. Engage in personalized conversations with your speaking partner, receive feedback, and open doors to limitless opportunities.

“ Without exaggeration,
Loora is the best app I have ever used. ”

Kavhoss, Sweden
App Store review 2023

An AI English speaking partner built to help you achieve English fluency
We believe everyone deserves the opportunity to speak English fluently and that learning English shouldn't be a barrier that holds anyone back from fulfilling their dreams and aspirations.Until now, those seeking to improve their English skills had to rely on expensive, one-on-one English tutors with limited availability. To bridge this gap, we've developed the most advanced AI English speaking practice app building a bespoke system of cutting-edge large language models, specifically trained and optimized to provide the best and most personalized experience for each learner. With Loora by their side, we enable people to tap into their true potential. We equip them with the tools to master English, paving the way for better opportunities in their careers, businesses, education, or personal lives.

Practice Real-Life English Conversations in Real-Life Situations
Immerse in conversations that span every situation—be it business meetings, job interviews, or friendly chats—and witness your fluency thrive where it truly matters: for you.

Instant English Evaluation & Feedback
Maximize your potential with real-time feedback from your AI tutor. Perfect pronunciation, fix grammar, embrace rephrasing, and enhance your accent. Thrive on continuous improvement.

Stress free: Loora is here just for you
Loora, your always-there AI English teacher, offers a safe, judgement-free zone for practicing English. It’s dedicated to empowering you every step of the way, provides feedback and tools to boost your confidence, making your path to English mastery both effective and fast.

Talk about Anything and Everything
Improve your English speaking, pronunciation and grammar by chatting with Loora, the most advanced AI English tutor. Talk about anything from sports to tech, business, fashion, or your latest book or show. Loora is up for any topic.

Loora is great for 
Real reviews from the App Store ☝️

Loora is always available.
Anytime, anywhere.
PriceAvailabilityAlways availableLimitedSession lengthUp to you45 minTalk about any topicReal-time feedbackLesson summaryPressure-free

FAQ

Why should I choose Loora as my AI English tutor?
Loora is the most advanced English language learning app built specifically for conversation. It uses AI to create a judgment-free environment where you can practice speaking English until you reach full fluency.

Is there a free version of the app to learn English?
You can download Loora for free and start learning English with our AI today. We offer a trial period so you can experience having a dedicated English speaking partner before committing to a subscription.

How does the AI tutor help me speak English more naturally?
Unlike a standard English learning app, Loora acts as a real-time conversation partner. The AI tools listen to your speech and provide instant feedback, helping you improve your English pronunciation and flow.

Can I practice Business English with the app?
Absolutely. Loora is a powerful app for learning Business English, featuring specific modules to help you practice speaking for interviews, meetings, and professional presentations.

Is it safe to talk to an AI English speaking partner?
Yes. When you speak English with our AI, your data is kept secure and private. We use your interactions only to customize your learning journey and ensure the English tutor provides relevant feedback.

What makes Loora a good app for advanced English learners and for preparing for exams like TOEFL or IELTS?
Most English apps focus on basic vocabulary, but Loora is designed for deep conversation, and our AI can discuss complex topics, making it ideal for advanced or professional learners. Loora is also excellent for preparing for high-stakes exams like TOEFL or IELTS by simulating speaking sections and giving instant feedback on fluency and grammatical range to boost your final score.

How does Loora help me sound more like a native speaker?
Our app features use advanced speech recognition to analyze your accent. The AI identifies exactly which sounds you’re struggling with and provides specific coaching to help you improve your speaking clarity and confidence.

How much does it cost to use this AI English tutor?
While hiring a private coach can be expensive, Loora is a very affordable English learning app. We offer a free trial so you can test our AI speaking features. After that, our subscription plans cost less per month than a single hour with a traditional human tutor.