---
title: "Think-Pair-Share: Effects of Collaboration on In-Class Participation"
source_url: "https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1041608021000522"
source_title: "Learning and Individual Differences (ScienceDirect)"
author: "Lukas Mundelsee, Susanne Jurkowski"
date: "2021-05"
type: research-paper
tags: [pedagogy, scaffolding, low-stakes, student-anxiety, equity, discussion]
summary: "Think-Pair-Share increases in-class participation (especially for shy students) by having students think individually, discuss with a partner, then share with the class; the peer validation step reduces state anxiety and builds oral confidence incrementally."
harvard_relevance: "TPS offers scalable oral assessment even in large classes, with AI resistance (students can't pre-generate responses to spontaneous questions) and equity benefits (low-stakes frequent practice reduces the 'oral fluency = privilege' problem)."
---
quality: Peer-reviewed journals (Nature, Taylor & Francis). Recent empirical research with strong credibility.
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1041608021000522

Elle's notes:
2. Think-Pair-Share: Low-Stakes Oral Participation Protocol
:page_facing_up: Think and pair before share: Effects of collaboration on students' in-class participation / Think-Pair-Share
ScienceDirect Learning and Instruction / Reading Rockets, 2021
Summary: Think-Pair-Share (TPS) is a structured protocol: students first think individually about a question, then pair with a partner to discuss, finally share ideas with the full class. Research with 393 students found TPS increased in-class participation compared to "think-share" (skip pairing) or "share" (no individual thinking). The technique "maximizes participation, focuses attention, and engages students in comprehending" through progressive oral engagement.
NatureResearch on the influencing factors of promoting flipped classroom teaching based on the integrated UTAUT model and learning engagement theoryScientific Reports - Research on the influencing factors of promoting flipped classroom teaching based on the integrated UTAUT model and learning engagement theoryhttps://www.nature.com/articles/s41598-024-66214-7Reading RocketsThink-Pair-ShareThink-pair-share is a cooperative learning strategy where students work together to solve a problem or answer a question about an assigned reading.https://www.readingrockets.org/classroom/classroom-strategies/think-pair-share[9:46 AM]Harvard Context: TPS offers scalable oral assessment even in large classes. Rather than calling on individual students (anxiety-inducing, privileges confident speakers), TPS ensures everyone speaks (at least to their partner) before volunteers share with the class. For Harvard implementation: (1) Use regularly, not occasionally — TPS becomes routine, reducing performance anxiety; (2) Grade participation holistically — observe engagement during pair discussions, not just full-class sharing; (3) Rotate pairs — students practice oral communication with diverse classmates, not just friends; (4) Provide sentence starters — scaffolding helps students who struggle initiating oral responses ("I think X because..." "Building on what you said..." "I'm uncertain about..."). The AI resistance: students can't pre-generate responses to spontaneous in-class questions, and pair dialogue reveals whether they understand or are parroting talking points. The equity benefit: low-stakes, frequent practice builds oral confidence incrementally, especially for students who fear high-stakes presentations.
Source quality: Peer-reviewed research (ScienceDirect) + established pedagogical resource (Reading Rockets). Credible evidence and practice guidance.

--

Learning and Individual Differences
Volume 88, May 2021, 102015

Think and pair before share: Effects of collaboration on students' in-class participation☆
Author links open overlay panelLukas Mundelsee, Susanne JurkowskiShow moreAdd to MendeleyShareCitehttps://doi.org/10.1016/j.lindif.2021.102015Get rights and contentUnder a Creative Commons licenseOpen access

Highlights
- •Hand raising frequencies increase after exchanging ideas with a partner.
- •Validating own notes with a partner reduces state anxiety.
- •State anxiety mediates the effects on hand raising when not validating own notes.
- •Shy students participate less frequently, but also benefit from collaboration.
- •Social evaluative concerns are the main reason why shy students participate less.

Abstract
Think-Pair-Share (TPS) is a teaching strategy thought to increase in-class participation, especially with shy students. After thinking for themselves, students talk to their seatmate to exchange their ideas and finally show their willingness to participate in-class by raising their hand. In the present field study, we tested TPS with 393 ninth-grade students against two variations, Think-Share (TS; first think, then raise hand) and Share (S; directly raise hand). Students reported on their shyness, and reported in each condition on their hand raising, state anxiety, and motives for (non-)hand raising. Analyses revealed that TPS led to more hand raising compared to the S condition. Lower levels of hand raising in TS were fully mediated by state anxiety. Shy students reported social evaluative concerns, and they raised their hand less frequently than their non-shy peers but also benefited from TPS. These results indicate the importance of peer collaboration for in-class participation.- Previous article in issue
- Next article in issue

Keywords
Student hand raisingStudent engagementCooperative learningShynessField experimentRecommended articles☆This research was supported by a research grant of the German Federal Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF).© 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc.