---
title: "HBS cold calling: oral pedagogy at scale for a century"
source_url: "https://www.hbs.edu/teaching/case-method/leading-in-the-classroom/Pages/Cold-Calling.aspx"
source_title: "Harvard Business School"
author: "Harvard Business School"
date: ""
type: pedagogy-guide
tags: [harvard, discussion, socratic-method, oral-exam-design, scale, pedagogy]
summary: "HBS case method is proof that oral participation can be a primary mode of learning and assessment at scale, with cold calls framed as developmental opportunities rather than punishments, using strategic student selection to drive preparation and engagement."
harvard_relevance: "HBS has done oral assessment at massive scale for decades; FAS faculty can learn from a century of refinement within the same university."
---
Cold Calling
https://www.hbs.edu/teaching/case-method/leading-in-the-classroom/Pages/Cold-Calling.aspx

Elle's notes:
The HBS case method is fundamentally oral pedagogy at scale. Cold calling objectives:
• "Establish and reinforce high expectations for student preparation"
• "Provide a developmental opportunity... with respect to content mastery, critical thinking, and communication skills"
• "Catalyze the discussion and serve as a touch point throughout the class session"
Key insight: "Cold calls should not be viewed as punitive. Instructors can frame cold calls as 'opportunities to shine.'"
Faculty select openers strategically: non-experts (to slow down), experts (to set high standards), students with relevant backgrounds, low-frequency participants (to develop), or randomly (to keep everyone prepared).

Why it matters: HBS has been doing oral assessment at massive scale for decades. The case method is proof that oral participation can be a primary mode of learning and assessment, not just a supplement. FAS faculty can learn from HBS's century of refinement.

--

Cold Calling — Harvard Business School Teaching Method

Cold calling is a cornerstone of Harvard Business School's case method teaching. It involves calling on an unprepared student to open class discussion after the instructor frames the session.

Key Objectives:
1. Establish and reinforce high expectations for student preparation
2. Foster student growth in content mastery, critical thinking, and communication
3. Initiate substantive classroom conversation

Instructors should frame cold calls as opportunities rather than punishments, balancing challenge with support.

Selection Strategies:
Instructors may choose students based on subject expertise (or lack thereof), background relevance to the case, participation patterns, or random selection to maintain unpredictability.

Call "Temperature":
The intensity varies by notice given:
- No notice: Immediate response (coldest)
- Short notice: Brief preparation time during class introduction
- Advance notice: Pre-class preparation (warm call)

Managing the Exchange:
Instructors must decide whether to stay with a student through follow-up questions or move to others, balancing substantive exploration against bringing additional voices into discussion.
