---
title: "Joughin's six dimensions of oral assessment framework"
source_url: "https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/0260293980230404"
source_title: "Assessment & Evaluation in Higher Education"
author: "Gordon Joughin"
date: "1998"
type: research-paper
tags: [oral-exam-design, pedagogy, rubrics, written-vs-oral]
summary: "Seminal 1998 framework identifying six dimensions of oral assessment (content type, interaction, authenticity, structure, examiners, orality) that provides a design toolkit for faculty implementing oral exams with evidence-based rigor."
harvard_relevance: "This framework prevents ad-hoc oral exam implementation and grounds design in 25+ years of educational research."
---
Assessment & Evaluation in Higher Education, Vol. 23, No. 4
https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/0260293980230404

Elle's notes:
Gordon Joughin's seminal 1998 paper established the theoretical framework for understanding oral assessment in higher education. Through systematic literature analysis, Joughin identified six key dimensions: (1) primary content type (what is being assessed), (2) interaction (one-way presentation vs. dialogue), (3) authenticity (how closely assessment mirrors real-world tasks), (4) structure (degree of standardization), (5) examiners (number, role, expertise), and (6) orality (importance of spoken medium itself). Crucially, Joughin argued that oral exams enable measurement of two distinct qualities: student command of the oral medium itself, and student command of content knowledge.

Harvard relevance: This framework provides a design toolkit for faculty. When designing oral assessments, instructors must make explicit choices along these six dimensions. For example: Will this be a dialogue (interactive viva) or presentation (one-way)? How much structure is needed to ensure fairness? Should we assess oral fluency itself, or use oral format purely to probe content understanding? The framework prevents ad-hoc implementation and grounds oral assessment in 25+ years of educational research. This isn't experimental pedagogy—it's evidence-based practice.

--

ABSTRACT ABSTRACT

An analysis of the literature on oral assessment in higher education has identified six dimensions of oral assessment: primary content type; interaction; authenticity; structure; examiners and orality. These dimensions lead to a clearer understanding of the nature of oral assessment, a clearer differentiation of the various forms within this type, a better capacity to describe and analyse these forms, and a better understanding of how the various dimensions of oral assessment may interact with other elements of teaching and learning.
